---
layout: post
title: "Language and reasoning"
date: 2024-08-06 09:56:00-0400
description: Language and reasoning
tags: "cognitive-science"
categories:
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
related_publications: 
---

We do not aspire to make strong claims about the evolutionary origins of language (because it's hard to evaluate). We do, however, make an argument about the function of language in modern humans and discuss optimization pressures that have shaped language.



Do any forms of **thought**—*our knowledge of the world and ability to reason over these knowledge representations*-require language (that is, representations and computations that support our ability to generate and interpret meaningfully structured word sequences)?

**What's expected evidence to verify the hypothesis?**

- If some forms of thought require language, then linguistic
mechanisms should be obligatorily engaged for at least those types of thinking and reasoning, and those types of thought should not be possible without language.
- If language is a tool for communication, then
language should show hallmarks of efficient information transfer.

**Why can we make conclusions now?**

- First, substantial advances have been made in deciphering the neural architecture of language.

- Second, massive corpora of diverse languages have become widely
available, along with a suite of powerful computational tools based on information theory for rigorously characterizing linguistic systems.

## Language network

- The language areas exhibit independence of input and output modalities
- The language areas represent and process both word
meanings and syntactic structure

## Language is not necessary for thoughts

**Individuals with brain damage or disorders**

Despite losing their linguistic ability, some individuals with severe aphasia are able to perform all tested forms of thinking and reasoning, as evidenced by their intact performance on diverse cognitive tasks.

**Neuroimaging evidence**
All regions of the language network are largely ‘silent’ during all tested forms of thought. That includes mathematical reasoning, formal logical reasoning, performing demanding executive function tasks such as working memory or cognitive control tasks, understanding computer code, thinking about others’ mental states, and making semantic judgments about objects or events.

**Cognitive development**

Hypothesis: Language may be critical for the **development** of certain kinds or ways of thinking.

Lack of access to linguistic representations does not make it
fundamentally impossible to engage in complex—including symbolic—thought, although some aspects of reasoning do show delays.

**Thus, it appears that in typical development, language and reasoning develop in parallel.**

Pre-verbal infants and many animal species—including non-human primates, corvids elephants and cephalopods—exhibit impressive inferential and problem-solving abilities, apparently without language, further bringing into question the necessity of language or a language-like system for complex thinking.

> Question: Does our thinking rely on symbolic representations, sub-symbolic or connectionist representations213,214, or some combination of these? How do representations that mediate abstract thought arise from the biological neural networks that are our brains215,216? Are any thought-related computations and the underlying neural circuits distinctly human, or do humans simply have more neural and cognitive resources163,173 that lead to greater sophistication?

## Language for communication

An efficient communication code should be easy to produce and understand, while being robust to noise (environmental or resulting from imperfect processing mechanisms), and
it must be learnable by people.

